# Secondary_theorem_separate_sexes

This repository hosts all code associated with the manuscript _Quantifying the phenome-wide response to sex-specific selection in Drosophila melanogaster_ currently in review at _Evolution_. The recommended way to review our code is through [this](https://tomkeaney.github.io/Secondary_theorem_separate_sexes/About.html) detailed report, built with quarto and hosted on github pages. It contains information on our coding environment, houses and explains the entirety of the code used to run analysis and build figures, and displays all three supplementary datasets. 

For those interested in running the code, we provide an explanation of the important files to run after you clone this repository:

The [data collation](docs/Data_collation.html) .qmd file contains information on our dataset and the code used for quality control. Several .csv files are needed to run this .qmd. First, data provided presented as line means are collated in `all.line.mean.phenos.csv` which contains line mean values for each trait and `all.line.mean.phenos_metadata.csv` which contains study meta-data. Second, data collated as raw, individual level data from which we calculated line means is found in `dgrp_phenos_calculated_from_raw_data.csv` with meta-data `dgrp_phenos_calculated_from_raw_data_meta_data.csv`. 

The [Find line means](docs/Get_line_means_from_raw_data.html) .qmd provides the code to run the statistical models we used to find line means when only raw, individual level data was provided by the original study.

The [Analysis](docs/Main_analysis.html) .qmd documents our statistical analysis and provides the code used to test the hypotheses of this study. All code needed to wrangle the data, run the models and build the figures is included.

The [About](docs/About.html) .qmd provides information on our `R` working environment and gives a quick introduction to the quarto website.

`_quarto.ylm`: instructions for how to build the quarto webpage

The `docs` folder contains all of the html files that are produced when quarto renders the website.

The `Figures` folder contains all of the main text and supplementary figures in .pdf form.

The `code` folder contains the `get_gene_annotations.R` file, which contains code to download _D. melanogaster_ gene annotations from org.Dm.eg.db, sourced from Bioconductor.

The `Supplementary_datasets` folder contains Supplementary datasets 1-3.

The `data` folder contains all the data needed to rerun the analysis. It has three major subdirectories.

**data collation**

input:
- `Raw_data_files` contains .csv files from all the studies providing raw, individual level data.
- `all.line.mean.phenos.csv` contains line mean values for each trait supplied directly by the study (or by the authors). `all.line.mean.phenos_metadata.csv` contains study meta-data for each of these traits. 

output:
- Contains datasets produced from the input data.
-  `all.dgrp.phenos_scaled.csv`, `all.dgrp.phenos_scaled.csv` and `meta_data_for_all_traits.csv` are the most important files, and should be downloaded if you wish to use the DGRP dataset in your own research.

**organismal_level_output**

-  `organismal_level_evidence_ratios.csv` is created by code found in `analysis.qmd` but saved and loaded to save time.

**transcriptome_output**

- All files are created by code found in `analysis.qmd`, but are saved for time convenience.

Finally, there are three other data files needed to run parts of the analysis:

- `all_dmel_genes.csv`: list of genes, including FBID number, name, symbol (abbreviation), entrez ID and the chromosome upon which they're found.
- `gene_annotations.csv`: can be generated by code, saved here for time saving.
- `trait_names.rds`: provides slightly tidier trait names. Joined with the larger datasets and used in figures and tables.

We welcome any queries or comments concerning our analysis; please email `tkeaney@uni-mainz.de`


